Add new blog for password authentication (#317)
prestodb/prestodb.github.io: website/blog/2026-04-15-presto-password-authentication.md

---
author: Pratyaksh Sharma
authorURL: https://www.linkedin.com/in/pratyaksh-sharma-60593769/
title: Password Authentication setup on Local
---

> Authentication and authorization are two main pillars for data security. While it is ok to have a presto cluster running 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Authentication and authorization are two main pillars for data security. While a Presto cluster can be set up to run  
```

> without authentication for development purposes, production clusters need to be secured at all times. Setting up secure clusters 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
without authentication for development purposes, production clusters must be secured at all times. Setting up secure clusters 
```

> comes with its own challenges in terms of the involved setup, configuration changes. In this blog, we try to set up a secure presto

Reviewer: ```suggestion
comes with its own challenges in terms of the involved setup and configuration changes. In this blog, we try to set up a secure Presto
```
I'll try to comment on any use of Presto (in sentences, not in code) that should be capitalized but I might miss one, so if you could help by checking this yourself in your revision I would appreciate it. Thanks!

Author: sure thing, will take care.

> cluster on local machine using password file based authentication and resolve the errors incrementally that come along the way. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cluster on a local machine using password file based authentication and resolve the errors incrementally that come along the way. 
```

## Target audience

> 1. Anyone who is interested in setting up secure presto clusters from scratch, particularly those with little idea about SSL connections.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Anyone who is interested in setting up secure Presto clusters from scratch, particularly those not familiar with SSL connections.  
```

## Expectations

> 1. Configure presto cluster to authenticate end users with password file based authentication on local machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Configure a Presto cluster to authenticate users with password file based authentication on a local machine.
```

> 2. Verify that once presto cluster is secured, no user is able to connect to the server without authenticating himself. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Verify that once the Presto cluster is secured, no user is able to connect to the server without authenticating themself. 
```

## Background

> Troubleshooting SSL handshake related errors can be overwhelming since most of the errors are not obvious and random google search generally does not give satisfactory answers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Troubleshooting SSL handshake related errors can be overwhelming: most of the errors are not obvious, and Google searches can frequently give unsatisfactory answers.
```

Before dealing with these errors, it is recommended to have good knowledge of 
1. What happens in a typical SSL handshake?
2. How are TLS connections different from mTLS connections?
3. What is a keystore and a truststore?
4. What is the role of keystore and truststore in SSL connections?

> 5. Basic java tools like `keytool` for managing keystores, truststores and certificates 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Basic Java tools like `keytool` for managing keystores, truststores and certificates. 
```

This article will introduce these topics before we begin setting up the Presto server.

## SSL Handshakes

Let us start with some theory that I feel is important to understand before going to hands on. 
SSL handshakes are a mechanism by which client and server establish the trust and logistics required to secure their connection 

> over the network. SSL handshake involves many steps, but we go over only the ones relevant for this blog -  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
over the network. SSL handshake involves many steps, but we go over only the ones relevant for this blog:  
```

 - Client provides a list of possible SSL versions and cipher suites to use.
 - Server agrees on a particular SSL version and cipher suite, responding with its certificate from its keystore.
 - Client verifies the authenticity of this certificate by checking it against a list of trusted Certificate Authorities (CAs) using its truststore.
 
### Keystore and Truststore

Keystore and Truststore are used to manage the keys and certificates required for secure communication. 

> Keystore stores your private keys and the corresponding public certificates. During a SSL handshake, presto server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The Keystore stores your private keys and the corresponding public certificates. During a SSL handshake, the Presto server
```

uses its keystore to present its identity to the client such as presto-cli. 

> A truststore stores only public certificates, typically from trusted Certificate Authorities. Clients such as presto-cli

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A truststore stores only public certificates, typically from trusted Certificate Authorities. Clients such as presto-cli
```

> will make use of its truststore to verify the certificate presented by the presto coordinator. If the server's certificate or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will make use of its truststore to verify the certificate presented by the Presto coordinator. If the server's certificate or
```

> the corresponding CA is not in client's truststore, connection fails with SSLHandshakeException.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the corresponding CA is not in the client's truststore, connection fails with `SSLHandshakeException`.
```

It is important to note that Java provides default truststore (`cacerts`) but there is no default keystore. So during a handshake, 
the connection can succeed when the server presents a certificate which is issued by well known CAs because the certificates issued by these CAs are 

> already present in the default truststore. However, in the case of local testing, there are chances the certificate is a self-signed one, and hence 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
already present in the default truststore. In the case of local testing, the certificate could be a self-signed one, and 
```

a custom truststore will be needed which contains the presented certificate.

### TLS and mTLS

> mTLS stands for mutual TLS. The key difference between TLS and mTLS is that TLS uses a one way handshake where only the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mTLS stands for mutual TLS (Transport Layer Security). The key difference between TLS and mTLS is that TLS uses a one way handshake where only the
```

server presents its certificate to the client and the client verifies that certificate using its truststore. However, mTLS
adds a mandatory second step where the client also presents its certificate to the server, allowing the server to authenticate 
the client, ensuring a strict two-way, zero trust security. 

> In a TLS handshake, client only needs a truststore to verify server's identity, while in a mTLS handshake, both server and client 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a TLS handshake, the client only needs a truststore to verify the server's identity, while in a mTLS handshake, both server and client 
```

> need corresponding keystore and truststore to present the certificate and verify other's identity respectively. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
need corresponding keystore and truststore to present the certificate and verify the other's identity respectively. 
```

#### Can keystore and truststore be the same?

> Since in a mTLS handshake, both keystore and truststore are needed to be available with both the involved parties, this raises the obvious question - 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because both a keystore and truststore are needed  in an mTLS handshake for both the involved parties, this raises the obvious question - 
```

> **Do keystore and truststore really need to be different or can they use the same file?** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Do keystore and truststore need to be different? Can they use the same file?** 
```

> Well technically speaking, a keystore and truststore can use the same physical file as they both use the same underlying formats

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Technically, a keystore and truststore can use the same physical file as they both use the same underlying formats
```

and management tools like the `Java Keytool`. However, it is recommended to keep them separate due to the following reasons:

 - **Security Risk**: Truststore often have lower security requirements since they only contain public data. If you combine them,
anyone with access to truststore can access your highly sensitive private keys as well.
 - **Maintenance**: Keeping keystore and truststore separate makes it easier to manage the certificates especially when certificates are rotated
at regular intervals.
 - **Default Values**: Java provides a default truststore, but there is no default keystore. 

### Keytool

The Keytool command is a key and certificate management utility provided by Java as part of its releases. Please refer to the 
[official documentation](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/technotes/tools/unix/keytool.html) and [Introduction to Keytool](https://www.baeldung.com/keytool-intro)
for more information.

## Set up Presto on a local machine

Use Intellij IDEA for setting up presto on local. See [Building Presto](https://github.com/prestodb/presto?tab=readme-ov-file#building-presto)
for instructions. 

## Set up password file based authentication

> Having almost no idea about how SSL connection works internally, I performed below steps - 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having almost no idea about how SSL connection works internally, I performed these steps: 
```

1. Created a `password.db` file for configuring `test` user using the commands: 

```java
pratyakshsharma@Pratyakshs-MacBook-Pro Documents % vi password.db 
pratyakshsharma@Pratyakshs-MacBook-Pro Documents % htpasswd -B -C 10 password.db test
New password:
Re-type new password:
Adding password for user test
```

> I was not sure if keystore path is needed for presto coordinator, so I added only these configurations to `config.properties`: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I was not sure if a keystore path was needed for the Presto coordinator, so I added only these configurations to `config.properties`: 
```

```java
http-server.https.enabled=true
http-server.https.port=8443
http-server.authentication.type=PASSWORD
```

I created a new `password-authenticator.properties` file: 

```java
password-authenticator.name=file
file.password-file=/Users/pratyakshsharma/Documents/password.db
```

> On trying to start presto server, this error appeared: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When I tried to start the Presto server, this error appeared: 
```

	at ProviderInternalFactory$1.call(ProviderInternalFactory.java:67)
	at ProvisionListenerStackCallback$Provision.provision(ProvisionListenerStackCallback.java:109)
	at LifeCycleModule.provision(LifeCycleModule.java:53)
	at ProvisionListenerStackCallback$Provision.provision(ProvisionListenerStackCallback.java:117)
	at ProvisionListenerStackCallback.provision(ProvisionListenerStackCallback.java:66)
	at ProviderInternalFactory.circularGet(ProviderInternalFactory.java:62)
	at BoundProviderFactory.get(BoundProviderFactory.java:59)
	at ProviderToInternalFactoryAdapter.get(ProviderToInternalFactoryAdapter.java:40)
	at SingletonScope$1.get(SingletonScope.java:169)
	at InternalFactoryToProviderAdapter.get(InternalFactoryToProviderAdapter.java:45)
	at InternalInjectorCreator.loadEagerSingletons(InternalInjectorCreator.java:213)
	at InternalInjectorCreator.injectDynamically(InternalInjectorCreator.java:186)
	at InternalInjectorCreator.build(InternalInjectorCreator.java:113)
	at Guice.createInjector(Guice.java:87)
	at Bootstrap.initialize(Bootstrap.java:263)
	at PrestoServer.run(PrestoServer.java:169)
	at PrestoServer.main(PrestoServer.java:103)
```

> On checking the line of code which was throwing the NPE, I figured out a keystore was needed for the http-server. So I created a keystore on local as follows: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On checking the line of code which was throwing the NPE, I figured out a keystore was needed for the http-server. So I created a keystore on the local system with the following commands: 
```
Do you think the audience you're writing for will easily read `NPE`? Consider `NullPointerException` or `Null Pointer Exception` if you think some of your readers will hesitate over this acronym.

Author: Fair point, changed it to NullPointerException

```

This is because `PasswordAuthenticatorPlugin` is not registered with the server. To fix this, I added this line to `plugin.bundles` in `config.properties`: 

```java
../presto-password-authenticators/pom.xml
```

When I tried again, the server started successfully.

```java
2026-04-16T12:14:39.909+0545	INFO	main	com.facebook.presto.server.PrestoServer	======== SERVER STARTED ========
```

Next I tried to run `presto-cli` and the following error appeared: 

```java
pratyakshsharma@Pratyakshs-MacBook-Pro presto % presto-cli/target/presto-cli-0.297-SNAPSHOT-executable.jar --user test --password
Password:
        Exception in thread "main" java.lang.IllegalArgumentException: Authentication using username/password requires HTTPS to be enabled
        at com.google.common.base.Preconditions.checkArgument(Preconditions.java:143)
        at com.facebook.presto.cli.QueryRunner.setupBasicAuth(QueryRunner.java:166)
        at com.facebook.presto.cli.QueryRunner.<init>(QueryRunner.java:95)
        at com.facebook.presto.cli.Console.run(Console.java:143)
        at com.facebook.presto.cli.Presto.main(Presto.java:31)

```

> To enable HTTPS as the error suggested, I had to include `--server` flag in the command with https endpoint because it takes `http://localhost:8080` by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable HTTPS as the error suggested, I had to include the `--server` flag with an HTTPS endpoint because it uses `http://localhost:8080` by default.
```

I ran the new command - 

```java
pratyakshsharma@Pratyakshs-MacBook-Pro presto % presto-cli/target/presto-cli-0.297-SNAPSHOT-executable.jar --user test --server https://localhost:8443 --password
Password: 
presto> 
```

And that was successful! 

> I was able to access interactive shell, but on trying to run a simple query ``show catalogs``, I hit another error - 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I was able to access the interactive shell, but when I tried to run a simple query such as ``show catalogs``, I hit another error: 
```

```java
presto> show catalogs;
Error running command: javax.net.ssl.SSLHandshakeException: PKIX path building failed: sun.security.provider.certpath.SunCertPathBuilderException: unable to find valid certification path to requested target
```

For authentication related errors, you will not see any stacktrace on the Presto console because the query does not reach the Presto coordinator.

On exploring a bit, I figured out that the Common Name that I had used in my certificate in keystore was not correct and it needs to be the unqualified hostname of the

> Presto coordinator. So I created a fresh keystore as below - 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Presto coordinator. So I created a fresh keystore as below: 
```

```

```java
pratyakshsharma@Pratyakshs-MacBook-Pro presto-https % keytool -genkeypair -alias presto -keyalg RSA -keystore keystore1.jks 
Enter keystore password:  
Re-enter new password: 
What is your first and last name?
  [Unknown]:  Pratyakshs-MacBook-Pro.local
What is the name of your organizational unit?
  [Unknown]:  
What is the name of your organization?
  [Unknown]:  
What is the name of your City or Locality?
  [Unknown]:  
What is the name of your State or Province?
  [Unknown]:  
What is the two-letter country code for this unit?
  [Unknown]:  
Is CN=Pratyakshs-MacBook-Pro.local, OU=Unknown, O=Unknown, L=Unknown, ST=Unknown, C=Unknown correct?
  [no]:  yes

Enter key password for <presto>
	(RETURN if same as keystore password):  

Warning:
The JKS keystore uses a proprietary format. It is recommended to migrate to PKCS12 which is an industry standard format using "keytool -importkeystore -srckeystore keystore1.jks -destkeystore keystore1.jks -deststoretype pkcs12".
```

I updated the value of the property in `config.properties`:

```java
http-server.https.keystore.path=/Users/pratyakshsharma/Documents/presto-https/keystore1.jks
```

and restarted the server.

> On trying the query on Presto CLI again, I hit the same error as before:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On trying the query on Presto CLI again, the same error appeared as before:
```

```java
presto> show catalogs;
Error running command: javax.net.ssl.SSLHandshakeException: PKIX path building failed: sun.security.provider.certpath.SunCertPathBuilderException: unable to find valid certification path to requested target
```

> This error was super confusing and gave no direct idea around what might have gone wrong. At this point I almost gave up and created an issue on [Presto github](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/issues/27485).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This error was super confusing and gave no direct idea of what might have gone wrong. At this point I almost gave up, and I created an issue on [Presto github](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/issues/27485).
```

While waiting for suggestions on the raised ticket, I started reading further about the [Java Truststore File for TLS](https://prestodb.io/docs/current/security/tls.html#java-truststore-file-for-tls) in the Presto documentation, and I found out that _For the Presto CLI to trust the Presto coordinator, the coordinator’s certificate must be imported to the CLI’s truststore._

> I followed the documentation in [Importing self-signed certificates from a Presto (Java) server to a Java Truststore](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/software-hub/5.1.x?topic=administering-importing-self-signed-certificates-truststore) to import server's certificate to CLI's truststore. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I followed the documentation in [Importing self-signed certificates from a Presto (Java) server to a Java Truststore](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/software-hub/5.1.x?topic=administering-importing-self-signed-certificates-truststore) to import the server's certificate to the CLI's truststore. 
```

> Specifically, while the Presto server was running, I ran these commands: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the Presto server was running, I ran these commands: 
```
